Hello everybody and welcome back in front of us here we have three spheres now I'm sure some of you
are scratching your head at this point go Mike you've lost that you've been playing with Blender too
long this is definitely a cube in the middle well we can also make that sphere and each one has different
merits and drawbacks when we use it let's go to find out more okay so we have our default cube in front
of us we know what that looks like I'm gonna press G Y and 3 just move it out of the way let's add in
we shift in a another mesh object and we should pick the U V sphere and then finally we shall add another
object the IKO sphere and then we're going to move that's on the y axis it's probably minus 3 so it's
out of the way.
So if we have a look at these three objects the first one on our left here is an Iko sphere so it's
made up all of triangles and you may have heard that triangles are bad and evil well they're not they're
very useful in certain circumstances and in others they can be a real hindrance so it's just their application
that we need to watch our U V sphere which is typical if you think of maps of the world has the drawback
of having this point in the middle so can also cause a few issues because if we zoom in really this
top here is a series of triangles but otherwise this is a pretty useful for a bold for a planet for
many things along those lines this sphere on the very end isn't a sphere I'm hearing you shout but it
is it this is a typical sphere that we call a quad sphere it's actually a sphere made of all of chords
it's just incredibly low poly at the moment it only has six sides and a sphere obviously has infinite
sides but these two here on the left the ICA sphere and the u v sphere they don't have an infinite number
of sides they're just getting closer to being that.
So what do we do in order to get our sphere closer to that whilst in object mode we can scroll down
and go to our modifiers tab when we add a modifier we've got this option under generate so we're generating
additional geometry subdivisions surface and if it's set to the cats model clock what we will find is
it will squish together more and more into a sphere type object where we increase the view levels now
this will end up with a slightly smaller as we can see here if we look at it from the right side a slightly
smaller than usual sphere and also slightly cube if you have a look at a slightly squat in certain directions
so we can get around that now we do have to pick a level in order to do this I'm going to roughly three
here it looks roughly the same amount of faces as I V sphere but then I'm going to click apply so no
longer are we modifying existing geometry we've created that geometry now when we go into edit mode
there is real geometry there if we'd just gone into edit mode before it has still been a cube and then
the final thing here to make this more spherical I'm not press F 3 to search and we can type in 2 sphere
when we do that so 2 sphere.
There we go we can make this more spherical it's a very subtle change and it's a change between 0 and
1 but when we do that now we have a more spherical object and if you really wanted to match size we
could then just scale it up until it's approximately the right size again and there we go and the benefit
of this is it's made up of quads which means that if we ult and click we get our face loops running
around our model if we try and do that on ITV sphere whilst we do get them going around the rings the
segments are literally just half and it doesn't go all the way look you lose the triangle at the top
and as for the IKO sphere well you cannot have a face loop running around it because it's made up of
all of these triangles.
So there we go.
There are three different types of sphere each with their own uses each with their positives and their
drawbacks as well you just need to pick an appropriate one for certain situations and talking about
picking the perfect one for certain situations we need to pick the right one for our bowling ball and
that should challenge Okay so your challenge is to create a new blend to file the reason why we're creating
a new blender file is because in a bit we'll be bringing two separate blender files together so as create
our bowling ball in a new blender file and I'd like you to think carefully about what type of sphere
is gonna be great for a bowling ball a couple of tips here think carefully about which type is most
suited which type will enable us to place the holes easily if you think about how the geometry of the
topology of each one of those spheres is different.
Which ones do you think is going to be great for enabling us to place for holes for the fingers and
thumb and then create a sphere that's the right size for a bowling ball and just be aware that a bowling
ball or any circular object sometimes it's measured by its radius which is from the center to the outside
and sometimes its diameter which is all the way across.
Just bear that in mind we don't want any bowling balls that are twice the size they should be or half
the size they should because they look a bit silly next to those pins positively are now and give us
a go Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead and create the base for our bowling ball.
Okay so we start off with picking the appropriate sphere.
I'm going to rule out the U V sphere completely because it's geometry changes quite significantly as
you go across the surface of the sphere.
So I'm going to get rid of that.
The same can be said but to a lesser degree when it comes to the code sphere.
Now let's think about where we might put the finger holes.
Oh.
It's gonna be off center if we choose that.
Can we just space it out a little more perhaps.
No because this is all even and there's no odds around it's going to be a bit more difficult.
This one is possible.
We could certainly let's say in sets one of these faces and then extrude inwards to create the hole
that might work.
I don't think it's where I'm going with this one though so I'm going to get rid of the cord sphere.
So the last one left is this one and I'm in a brand new blender file I'm going to position it using
the properties window to the appropriate places center in our scene.
Perfect.
So this is going to be I think the ideal one.
Now I'm going to actually delete this.
I want a bit more detail on here.
That's certainly too low poly so I'm gonna add a new mesh object an icon sphere.
I'm going to bring up the properties and the subdivisions here I'm going to increase it by one level.
I think to just going to be it's far far too detailed.
So let's leave it at three subdivisions there.
Now we can pick some places and just pretend that we're going to place the holes.
So if we go ahead and let's say pick here here and here we can do that relatively easy.
Yeah that looks good there.
Now there are some differences but you will find across the surface here we have hexagons in many places.
Then occasionally where there's kind of a corner as it were there will be these pentagons as well.
So it does vary throughout.
So we'll have to pick somewhere where the Pentagon's themselves is another Pentagon or you could you
could argue that those three spaces if you had a very big hand would be suitable.
I don't think it would be in there but because we now know now know the locations of those we could
certainly pick this area here this area here and this one here for the finger holes themselves.
I think those would be pretty appropriately spaced.
But of course would refer to our reference material for making those decisions.
OK.
So we've figured out that this is the appropriate sphere now it just needs to be the appropriate size
there are a couple of ways of approaching this.
I once again I'm going to use the dimensions in order to do it and then apply my scale because I don't
have a clue at what scale in fact without doing some maths that it's going to have to base at the moment
this is a very very big bowling ball is two meters in its diameter.
Now looking at the specifications the diameter usually is around 22 centimeters it does vary.
There is some variance in it but if it's gonna be 22 centimeters that's absolutely fine.
So I'm going to set the X Y and Z dimensions so I'm going to hover over and dragged down and that's
going to enable me to edit them all at the same time.
So 22 centimeters is point to two of a meter in diameter.
So well obviously that is a lot smaller but that should be more representative now of our actual size.
We can view it from the top.
And if we really wanted to we could just see these big squares here.
Dunno if you can see that but these big squares here are one meter by one meter.
So these smaller squares that we're talking about these ones here which are now the biggest growers
are 10 centimeters each and we can see that is around 22 across.
Okay perfect.
I've lost it.
Where's it gone.
If that does ever happen to you remember you can use the number pad period kill full stop or of course
go to frame selected.
Remember we had our sphere selected if it wasn't selected we could select over in the outline.
So the final thing to do here is call it what it is that's going to be a bowling ball.
So that's right there.
And then finally just save it as the bowling ball so you should have two files bowling bowling okay
bowling ball you should have two files in the directory that you're working in at the moment.
I would always advise to keep the lessons together in separate directories.
I wouldn't dump them all into one folder.
It could get quite confusing later on when we're dealing with multiple models.
But there we go.
My base for my bowling ball is ready to go.
Causes several steps that we have to do in order to get there.
Now I haven't told you yet to set the shading level to smooth but if you have done that well done.
I'm going to set it to shade smooth now so that it's all done and ready for the next video.
Okay brilliant.
How did you guys get on.
Hope you've picked the IKO sphere as well.
I'm just wrapping up now and I realize I've not applied my scale.
I will do that so that we don't end up with anything funny happening later and there we go.
Please share your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.